The kyphoscoliotic type of Ehlers-Danlos syndrome (type VI): differential effects on the hydroxylation of lysine in collagens I and II revealed by analysis of cross-linked telopeptides from urine. 
The kyphoscoliotic type of Ehlers-Danlos syndrome (EDS type VIA) (OMIM 225400) is an autosomal recessive connective tissue disorder that results from mutations in the lysyl hydroxylase 1 gene (PLOD1) causing underhydroxylation of lysine residues in tissue collagens, particularly of skin. Previous studies have shown that the pool of collagen cross-linking amino acids, hydroxylysyl pyridinoline (HP) and lysyl pyridinoline (LP) excreted in urine has an abnormally low HP/LP ratio, which is diagnostic of the condition. Here we isolated cross-linked peptides containing these residues from the urine of a child with EDS VIA homozygous for a mutation that results in a stop codon and effective null expression of PLOD1 enzyme activity. Peptides that had originated from bone type I collagen and cartilage type II collagen were identified. A cross-linked N-telopeptide fraction that is derived from bone type I collagen contained only LP, no HP, which means that the helical lysines at residues 930 of alpha 1(I) and 933 of alpha 2(I) of the collagen triple-helix had not been hydroxylated. The equivalent peptide fraction from a normal child's urine gave a ratio of HP to LP of 1.5:1 typical for normal bone collagen. A second cross-linked peptide that is derived from the C-telopeptide domain of cartilage type II collagen showed both HP and LP in a 2:1 ratio, compared with 18:1 for the equivalent peptide from a normal child's urine. The results show that in EDS VIA, bone type I collagen is more markedly underhydroxylated than cartilage type II collagen, at least at those helical sites that form cross-links. The residual fraction of HP found in the urine of EDS VI patients therefore appears to be contributed in significant part by the degradation products of cartilage. Since PLOD1 is null, other PLOD genes must be responsible for the helical hydroxylation activity that results in HP. The presented approach of analyzing urinary cross-linked C-telopeptide fragments of type II collagen may allow the detection of chondrodysplasias due to genetic defects in lysyl hydroxylase isoforms active in cartilage.
